[Music]
good afternoon and welcome to the
Commonwealth service at a rather damp
Westminster Abbey now this isn't though
going to be another gray day and March
this service is a celebration of the
modern day Commonwealth its diversity
and the Queen's commitment to it
throughout her long reign now inside the
people have been gathering for a couple
of hours and they've been entertained as
well by a Maori choir who will later on
in while the service goes on we'll be
producing some absolutely wonderful
music I think they're taking up and
largest turnout two of the royal family
at this service than there's been for
many many years and the first appearance
at the abbey forum is Maegan Markel
ahead of her wedding to Prince Harry in
May this year we're seeing now a
procession of 53 flags from 53 nations
of the Commonwealth they're carried by
young representatives of all those
countries and youth is a real theme
today because the Commonwealth is young
60% of the population under the age of
30 now the order in which the flags are
possessed processed is really a
microcosm of history a record of
Independence as well as the order in
which the countries joined the
Commonwealth you can see Britain there
at the front now at the back the most
recent joiners Rwanda and Mozambique
both countries have no historical ties
to the British Empire India is
represented of course 1.3 billion and
so's Nehru just over 10,000 people
Gambia is here too rejoining the
Commonwealth after a period of a
suspension now Her Majesty the Queen is
head of the Commonwealth and she has
been pivotal in its development and
that's a commitment she first made 70
years ago
as I speak to you today from Cape Town I
am six thousand miles from the country
where I was born but I am certainly not
six thousand miles from home in 1947 on
her 21st birthday
Princess Elizabeth revealed her deep
feeling and vision for the future of the
Commonwealth we shall be able to make on
this ancient Commonwealth which we all
love so dearly an even grander thing
more prosperous over the past seventy
years the Queen's hopes have been
realized as it's grown from eight to
fifty three independent countries across
six continents made up of 2.4 billion
people totaling a third of the world's
population
the reason for its growth is perhaps due
to one of the Commonwealth's founding
values that all members are equal from
India with the largest population to the
smallest Naru in the Pacific the queen
has made more than 200 visits to member
countries most recently to Malta for the
last Commonwealth Heads of Government
Meeting in 2015
other members of the royal family travel
the Commonwealth to promote its values
such as protecting the environment
raising awareness of climate change it
may literally mean the survival of their
countries or their extinction
highlighting the importance of young
people and increasing access to health
and education the younger generation
coming through want to talk about it but
there's still that stigma so if us
getting tested normalizes it and makes a
difference then drop Oregon
these values will be at the heart of
discussions in London next month when
the Queen will preside over her 24th
Heads of Government Meeting sitting next
to me here in Westminster Abbey is
someone who can give us the inside story
on the Commonwealth he's even writing a
book about it it's the Daily Mail
journalist Robert Hardman Robert what
happens at these meetings
while Jeremy they are very unlike the
average summit on the summit circuit and
that's largely because they are they
have a family feel they have an intimacy
that you just don't get at your average
summit and that really comes down from
the Queen herself and we're gonna see
that particularly this year because this
is a summit that's going to be at home
it's gonna be staged both at Buckingham
Palace and at Windsor Castle and it's
going to have a really very special
atmosphere and there's something they
have called the leaders retreat now
that's not the sort of thing you'd see
it any use of it now you certainly would
get them wandering off in casual clothes
it's dispensing with their spin doctors
and all their minders and really going
into as it says retreat and some of them
have even one in Kuala Lumpur in 1989
featured a karaoke much the terror of
mrs. Thatcher who wasn't actually forced
to take part but they they have they do
have this special atmosphere and this
this one will be at Windsor Castle and
Britain was a late substitute yes poor
Vanuatu were planning to host what would
have been the 2017 Commonwealth summit
but due to a cyclone and a lot of damage
that wasn't to be
and so Britain stepped in at the last
minute that's why there is going to be
this remarkable gathering here in both
London and Windsor and why we're going
to see so many members of the family
here today and Theresa May who will be
taking over as the because of her office
you'll be very important person at the
Commonwealth summit coming up yes this
will be her her first summit first host
summit
now she's every year the Commonwealth
chooses a theme and this year the theme
which Theresa May has British Prime
Minister has already talked about is
towards a common future and now one of
the initiatives encourages communities
to come together over a good lunch
my colleague Sonali Shah is with two
people for whom food is a real way of
life chetna makan and Ainsley Harriott
that's right I'm with two big foodies
here and Chetan the most of us know you
as a semifinalist from the Great British
Bake Off in 2014 but what many people
won't know is how much food helped you
feel at home when you first came to the
UK from India 14 years ago yes it did I
think that's the beauty of food because
it is a perfect way to break barriers
get people talking and I used to cook
for my colleagues and neighbors and I
found it really easy way to connect with
them and you're involved Aynsley in the
big launch the Commonwealth big launch
alongside Chetna how can all of us get
involved everybody can get involved
because it brings communities together I
think the best thing to do obviously is
to go online the big lunch calm get all
your information but
what the Commonwealth has done is just
created this wonderful opportunity for
people around the globe two and a half
billion people to really just come
together we've got a party here on the
3rd of June if everyone wants to get
involved nine point three million people
got involved last year and for those of
you who think why should I get involved
do you realize that 83% of people in
Britain would not recognize their
neighbors in a police lineup that's why
it's so important you know there's a lot
of loneliness out there there's a lot of
people who are feeling isolated this is
a wonderful opportunity on the 3rd of
June to bring all those people together
regardless of age regardless of cultural
backgrounds it's about the diverse
loving going on and we can do it through
food and you've put together a recipe
haven't you Chetan therefore it what's
your recipe so the recipes Papaji and
the reason I've chosen that is it's a
mixed of the bhaji is a mix of
vegetables and you eat it with bread so
the idea is to put it in a big bowl in
the center of the table and everyone can
dig in it's one of my favourite dishes
but can we just do it with some cheese
on toast or a glass of wine if we need
to of course you can literally you can
be oh you can have a little macaroon and
a cup of tea over the fence with your
neighbor it's about bringing people
together it really is and I'd love to
come to your house
so would I so it I mean it just goes to
show I'm food everyone thinks is part of
the big moments in our life but actually
it's those precious much little moments
in between that it's a huge part of tea
thank you so much thank you
well thanks and heart that say yeah
that's a great thought those big lunch
is coming up that is the big lunch is
one of a number of events leading up to
the summit of the Heads of Government
and Robert another one is the
Commonwealth fashion exchange which is
also going on that's right Jeremy I mean
we just heard that home how food and
bring people together a few days ago
Buckingham Palace there was a remarkable
event showing how fashion can bring
people together
there were these amazing collections
brought together under one roof
featuring top fashion designers from all
over the Commonwealth and but also very
small I've ever see the Duchess of
Cambridge with with Anna Wintour of folk
countess of wessex and they they were
shown dresses that that you had big high
street names but at the same time very
small little producers from tiny
Commonwealth areas artisans hand-woven
crafts all coming together and he just
represents what the Commonwealth's all
about really which is the very big and
the very small and with an emphasis on
youth lots of lots of support I think we
can see there as well as from the royal
family but from celebs as well that's
right I mean the colemar's does does
bring in VIPs and celebrities from all
over the world we'll see some here today
as well and all the other events coming
up in there in the run-up we've got the
the Queen's young leaders is another
important strand or this Commonwealth
story another event that brings together
young people a youth is a big theme
isn't it the youth of people in the
Commonwealth and also this remarkable
scheme that offers a package of training
mentoring a network for people who get
this award and they get this award as
well from Her Majesty the Queen yes it
must be a big thrill yes there we see
some of them at last year's recipients
this is a project very much driven by
the Queen herself the idea is to find
really inspirational young people across
the Commonwealth who are already making
a difference in their communities and
who very may very well may one day go on
and actually run their country so we see
last year's a remarkable people a young
man from Bangladesh who'd set up a first
aid project that had reached out to
thousands of people in a disaster area
everyone you talk to has an
extraordinary story and it's all been
driven by the Queen in this case funded
by her Diamond Jubilee Trust let's go
back to Sonali she's with two people who
are taking part in today's service
dr. Andrew bast Aras and just breat core
Andrew you're a guest speaker because
you've received funding from one of the
Queen's trusts tell about tell us about
the focus of your worm millions of
people across their Commonwealth are
needlessly blind for in five of whom
could be treated with simple treatments
so our mission is to change that by
finding them and linking them to the
right services you really believe they
can be easily treated things that we
have to take for granted in the Western
world the majority of people including
myself it was a simple pair of glasses
that was needed for many others it's a
cataract operation which can be done in
ten minutes for ten pounds so trying to
eradicate this preventable blindness
it's an ambitious goal and you think
that a device attached to a mobile phone
could really really help show us that
yeah I think there's all sorts of new
technologies and this is one possible
way to contribute so by clipping this
device onto the phone enable somebody to
see inside the eye so a non health care
worker can identify someone in a remote
setting and link them to services such
as our program in Kenya where teachers
are finding children in schools and
making sure they get treatment on a
timely basis
I know you're going to be talking more
about your work during the actual
service so we look forward to hearing
more about that just brief you'll be
performing your poem the moment tell us
about its message so the moment is
basically a poem all about humanity and
togetherness this idea of what we can do
on an individual basis to help one
another and to help society in general
and I thought today is kind of the
perfect place to share that message and
I know you're such a huge believer that
the spoken word can be such a powerful
tool and it's almost not colonists
enough absolutely I think the arts in
general the creative scene in general is
something we can really tap into more
and what I do spoken word poetry is a
really accessible way for people to talk
about topics perhaps we don't talk about
in other ways and an accessible way for
people to access those things and I hope
that works today I know you're in the
middle of your twelve month long
honeymoon and this is part of it did you
know that I'm true so we know how
important a day like this is this trip
to both of you really absolutely we am
have been traveling for six months so
far
so as honeymooning also working on
humanitarian projects in countries
across the Commonwealth as well and then
we fly out tomorrow morning to Cape Town
to carry on the journey well it look
forward to hearing both of your
reflections during the service good luck
thank you snarly there with two very
impressive people what we're going to
see now is a procession by athletes one
of the big highlights
of the Commonwealth is always going to
be sport it's one of those things that
links a lot of countries and the
Commonwealth Games is coming up next
month in April
but seeing faith leaders arriving as
well coming up the middle of the abbey
there
the Commonwealth is a very diverse place
and so it's really I think highly
appropriate that six faith leaders will
be here and will hear them saying six
prayers later on
our guests are going to be arriving
after those faith leaders you seem some
very distinctive headwear religious
symbols
[Music]
I went for a walk around the Abbey just
before the main events of the day
started and there was a remarkable
relaxed atmosphere young people a lot of
young people more than 700 young people
are in the Abbey today 715 from schools
in Northern Ireland Wales Scotland in
the Northeast Northwest the Midlands
some scouts there and youth groups as
well including from Sri Lanka Bangladesh
Botswana Singapore South Africa a lot of
young people and that's you know that
comes
that's not accidental the theme of this
event today includes a lot to do with
youth Robert does it not that's right so
Jeremy the Queen right from the start is
believed in them the fact that young
people are the engine of the
Commonwealth as you said earlier 60
percent of them are under 30 Nicola
Sturgeon is also here there she is
sitting next to the First Minister of
Wales of Scotland has played very
important part in the Commonwealth story
held the last Commonwealth summit in
1997 in Edinburgh has actually held
three Commonwealth Games Lords
Commonwealth Games were in Glasgow
Jeremy Corbyn Norman Fowler cabinet
minister of course a very important man
in the Lord's now today's service is
going to feature some real music
performances some great music and one of
them is from the former One Direction
star Liam Payne and he's with Sonali
Liam welcome to the Commonwealth Service
tell us a little bit more about the song
that you'll be performing here today so
today I will be performing John Mayer
waiting on the world to change us I
think it's quite apparent you know for
the time at the moment and also I'm a
massive fan of John Mayer so I was kind
of waiting to perform something
this is the the perfect occasion for it
really it really does have some
beautiful lyrics to it doesn't it yeah
for sure and you know III like I say I
think of it with the way the world is at
the moment I think it's a superpower as
well as having so many fans across the
Commonwealth and we know how young the
Commonwealth is you've also been
involved with the Queen's young leaders
program haven't you yeah I went down to
the presentation it was really nice just
to see so many young people doing such
amazing things you know across nations
we're having so important for us to show
like a you know a nice united front
right now and it's coming from the youth
is is a really beautiful thing I guess
well we're very much looking forward to
your version of waiting on the world to
change thank you thank you and not long
now before the Royal parties start
arriving there's a very big turnout of
senior members of the royal family this
year and of course that's to do with the
fact that the Commonwealth Heads of
Government meeting is going to be held
here in London
people talking getting ready for what's
going to be I think an important day
there's the prime minister of course to
resume
children I suspect waiting to see see
what the Queen looks like in real life
[Music]
well-behaved kids Theresa May is going
to take over the Commonwealth chair from
the prime minister of Malta after the
Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting
here in London next month
[Music]
I think we can see there as well than
Minister of Health and Wellness of
Botswana
now that's Juana is a country that's
very important in the campaign against
avoidable blindness that we'll be
hearing more of later in the service
it's the only country in the world the
only country that plans to screen all
children for issues to do with their
sight well family has now started to
arrive
countess of wessex Robert very active
oil when it comes to the Commonwealth
yes Jeremy the countess has been very
key to that campaign you just mentioned
on avoidable blindness she's a vice
patron of the Diamond Jubilee trust and
has been out looking at a lot of its
work in fact only a few months ago was
in Bangladesh and actually managed
herself there she is she managed herself
to diagnose a seven-month baby sub
month-old baby with a serious eye
condition which is now had it's very
successfully been treated and that
entire area of Bangladesh's
Duke of York is just coming through the
west door of the abbey now he was in
Australia pretty recently in September
2017 and he went to the Gold Coast
Robert where the Commonwealth Games is
going to be held next month did and he's
actually going to be holding his own
event in conjunction with the summit his
pitch at the palace scheme for
entrepreneurs they're going to have a
special Commonwealth event coming in
there as well we saw a little earlier we
saw the Duchess of Gloucester she's been
out in the Commonwealth the Duke of
Gloucester earlier today as actually is
in Malawi having a Commonwealth big
lunch here we see the Princess Royal as
well coming along behind the Duke of
York she's very very key to a lot of
what the royal family do in the
Commonwealth
just ahead over there princess Rahl was
in Ghana only last year marking the 60th
anniversary and just in the line there
you can see the lady in the the blue
suit that's Baroness Patricia Scotland
she's the Secretary General of the
Commonwealth and there are as well lined
up in that in that receiving line the
Prime Minister of Malta dr. Joseph from
Muscat and he'll be giving a reading
later on as well
as talking to Princess Alexandra their
Queens kasnia
[Music]
and behind her as the Duchess of
Gloucester I think who was a very very
very active in a lot of things
talking now the Lord ha Lord Hal of
Guildford from a British cabinet
minister and president of the Royal
Conwell Society so these are some of the
big movers inside the Commonwealth you
can see it's quite a relaxed atmosphere
there
[Music]
Prince of Wales
I think we'll be arriving with languages
yes since the Duke and Duchess of
Cambridge the the tube sporting his new
Shawn look the Duchess is expecting of
course her third child in April that
become fifth in line to the throne and
as well as that there is Megan Megan
Markel like a lot of eyes will be on her
today wearing Lenten cream coat there
with Prince Harry who shall be marrying
it's George's Chapel Windsor in May
they're looking at Ghanaian dancers and
drummers who very patiently be waiting
there in what has been a bit of a damp
afternoon miss Marcal is having a crash
course
Robert is she not in Britishness he's
been all over the country in fact with
Prince Harry and recent weeks to meet
all parts of the United Kingdom today of
course we have first official engagement
in the Queen really her first experience
of a big state occasion of Westminster
Abbey Westminster Abbey who plays for
coronations and royal weddings including
the Duchess of Cambridge where she was
of course married here to Cambridge in
2011 so this is somewhere that's going
to feature a great deal in yes and I
would imagine too that the Commonwealth
is going to feature pretty heavily with
Prince Harry and Megan Markel as well
because she's already said she's looking
forward to doing some tours doing some
visits yes they both referred very
prominent in their engagement interview
to the work they were looking forward to
doing in the Commonwealth as are all the
younger members of the family the Duke
and Duchess of Cambridge they're leading
the way they've been on many
Commonwealth towards their first big
overseas tour as a married couple was to
Canada they've been to Australia and New
Zealand with their young children there
tonight we'll be joining his father at
more Brewhouse Commonwealth headquarters
to meet the entire Commonwealth
diplomatic corps don't forget that
thanks to the Queen
Ambassadors are from the Commonwealth
aren't even called ambassador's they're
called High Commissioners and they're
all invited tonight they'll meet the
Duke of Cambridge and his father the
Prince of Wales fair miss Marcal has
said as well as some of the work that
she's been doing some of the campaign's
she's already been involved with in the
past have been in Commonwealth countries
like Rwanda ferry new member of the
Commonwealth and India of course who's
been with being in the Commonwealth for
a long time yeah the the the great thing
about the Commonwealth is it just it's
on all continents it spans all sizes all
faiths all continents and and as we've
said earlier the emphasis on youth and I
think youth is very much going to be on
the minds of the this younger generation
of the royal family who are now doing a
lot of the overseas work that once upon
a time the Queen would have done with
the Duke of Edinburgh which the Prince
of Wales is doing that they're meeting
there the the Duke was speaking they're
still speaking to dr. Muscat and his
wife the prime minister of Malta
that's Michael Lake afterwards the
director of the Royal Commonwealth
Society
now the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge
have carried out overseas visits on
behalf of the Queen including
Commonwealth countries including Canada
Australia and New Zealand
and waiting for the arrival of the
Prince of Wales and the Duchess of
Cornwall right at the rain themselves
have a look at the Ghanaian dancing
here they are environmental issues and
things which Prince of Wales is known to
be absolutely passionate about and of
course that's a big thing for the
Commonwealth yes the Commonwealth over
the years has reflected and very much
applauded a lot of the princes
initiatives to do with the environment
don't forget 24 Commonwealth nations a
small island states very very vulnerable
to environmental change so the prince is
acutely aware of their concerns he's
visited 43 countries of the Commonwealth
and most recently he's ticked off
Malaysia and Antigua and Barbuda yes he
was out in Asia towards the end of last
year and went to India as well it's on
that tour and as ever very much they're
representing the Queen supporting her
work but at the same time talking a lot
about the core concerns of the
Commonwealth young people environmental
problems of the future
outside Majesty the Queen has arrived
[Music]
they're from the state trumpeters of the
household cavalry green inches
westminster abbey from the very
beginning robert she's shown a huge
commitment to the commonwealth that she
seems really to be rather enjoying
herself already here today well i think
you could really say the queen is the
commonwealth here she is greeting people
she sees year after year at this event
this is an event she herself has created
she hasn't missed one of these calm off
day services since 1986 and that was any
country was on tour at the time and her
first her first footstep abroad was in
the heart of the commonwealth when she
went to africa with her father in 1947
she's held this organization together
she's brought it from an organization of
eight nations to what it is today 53 i'm
ready everyone in this abbey will be
very well aware that the work not for
her this organization might well not
even be here today there's a good quote
about all this from Winston Churchill
and when he was Prime Minister of course
she was already queen he said the
monarch is the magic link which unites
our loosely bound but strongly into
woven Commonwealth I suppose has that
deepened do you think or has that frayed
over the years oh no I think it's I
think it's beautiful
it really has seven it's it's it's often
said she is the glue
that holds it together that binds it
they're here next the national anthem
fanfare from the Grenadier Guards
[Music]
[Applause]
the processional hem of praise ye the
Lord
[Music]
[Applause]
on behalf of the Dean and chapter I
welcome you warmly to Westminster Abbey
for our annual celebration of the
Commonwealth this year we looked
together towards a common future in
which all can flourish and become what
we are in the care and keeping of
Almighty God as we give thanks for our
rich diversity and for our common
humanity that has prayed together for
peace and unity and that we may offer
one another mutual friendship and
support first in the words of Jesus let
us pray for the coming of God's kingdom
our Father who art in heaven hallowed be
thy name thy kingdom and forgive us and
lead us not into temptation but deliver
us from evil for thine is the kingdom
the power war forever and ever
now with their own special welcome not
earrin Anna the London Maori choir
[Music]
[Applause]
the moment that you realize that true
contentment can be found when we serve
others all other desires will seem so
small and the moment that you see joy in
another beings eyes because of your own
selfless actions I starts to make a lot
more sense and the moment that you begin
to acts as the reflection of the visions
that you have for a better world things
will begin to change and the moment that
you recognize your own responsibility
for the betterment of others you'll see
such beauty in life and the moment that
you recognize that you'll make more of
an impact by being righteous and always
being right rewards will come and fall
into your lap and the moment that you
are more concerned about learning to
love than to be loved positive emotions
of oceanic depths will engulf you and
the moment that you are more concerned
about understanding others than to
always be understood that's when your
mind will truly begin to learn and the
moment that we realize that our enemies
are not physical flesh and blood yet
they are own thoughts peace will begin
to conquer and the moment that we
overcome those inner enemies rather than
deflecting them onto others merriment
will come find you and the moment that
you are more concerned about learning to
listen rather than to always be heard
your hair languages that you thought
your minds could never fathom the moment
that you realize that life will always
be about mastering Andry
earning conquering and climbing your
journey will begin to feel so smooth and
the moment that we all believe that we
can change this world for the better we
will do it because life is but these
moments where we learn change grow and
give so go live your moment thank you
inspiring words there for me just
breathe for well-deserved applause next
a modern choral Anthony
[Music]
[Applause]
by the grace given to me I say to
everyone among you not to think of
yourself more highly than you ought to
think but to think with sober judgment
each according to the measure of faith
that God has assigned for as in one body
we have many members and not all the
members have the same function so we who
are many are one body in Christ and
individually we are members one of
another we have gifts that differ
according to the grace given to us
prophesy in proportion to faith ministry
in ministering the teacher in teaching
the exhort in exhortation the giver in
generosity the leader in diligence the
compassionate in cheerfulness let love
be genuine hate what is evil hold fast
to what is good love one another with
mutual affection outdo one another in
showing honor do not lag in zeal be
ardent in spirit serve the Lord rejoice
in hope be patient in suffering
persevere in prayer contribute to the
needs of the saints extend hospitality
to strangers just below the monument to
Newton now Liam Payne is going to sing
waiting on the world to change
[Music]
me and all my friends so misunderstood
savvy stem for nothing
there's nowhere I ever could you see
everything is going wrong with the world
no sleep just feel like we don't have
the means to rise above we keep waiting
on the world to change the world hard to
beat the system but when we're standing
at a distance so we keep on waiting the
world now if we had the power to bring
down neighbors shufen boy they put an
ever mr. Christmas no more ribbons on
the door
now when you trust you tell the vest
what you get is what you got when the
only information or they can
waiting waiting on the world to change
we keep on waiting waiting on the world
to change it's not that we don't care we
just know that the fighting fair to be
keep on waiting waiting on the world to
change
[Music]
waiting on the world to change one day I
generation it's gonna pull the
population to keep on waiting on the
world to change waiting on the world to
change on the world
[Applause]
mama Philip was 80 years old when I
first met her in Kenya she had been
blind for twenty years and was dependent
on her son Phillip living an hour's walk
from the nearest road she was unable to
walk or cook for herself her family
thought she had dementia when people
lose their eyesight they often lose
their independence their dignity and
their capacity to be a productive member
of the community a healthcare worker
examined mama Phillip and brought her to
our clinic when I examined her I
realized her problem was not dementia
it was cataract a curable condition and
yet she had lost two decades of her life
sadly her story is not unique
85 million people across the
Commonwealth are blind or have very poor
sight for in five unnecessarily so like
momma Phillip they have a treatable
condition I could have been one of them
I was diagnosed with severe visual
impairment at the age of 12 but I had
access to simple treatment a pair of
glasses I'll never forget the moment I
tried them on for the first time I saw
that trees had leaves on them and that
night I saw stars in the sky it
literally took my breath away
what else had I been missing it turned
out a lot with that simple pair of
glasses my education social life and
hopes of the future changed dramatically
in fact the entire trajectory of my life
changed I knew from a young age that the
opportunities I had were not universal
that ignited a fire in me which led me
to become a doctor than an eye surgeon
in 2012
I left my role in the NHS and with my
wife and our baby son we moved to Kenya
to establish a hundred eye clinics it
was tough we'd worked day and night
examining and treating every one we
could but it soon became clear it would
never be enough something needed to
change
with our team in Kenya we began building
smartphone apps and devices that made it
possible for non specialists to measure
someone's vision see inside their eye
and connect them to the right services
our first trial saw 25 teachers screened
21,000 children finding 900 with poor
vision in just nine days this work was
replicated and refined in India and then
in Botswana which is set to screen and
treat every school child in the entire
country by 2020 a world's first an
entire generation of school children
will have access to good eye health and
the opportunities it brings advances in
technology treatment and public health
mean that for most poor vision and
blindness no longer needs to be a life
sentence for the first time in human
history that is within our power to
eliminate avoidable blindness and poor
vision for everybody everywhere every
country in the Commonwealth has the
opportunity to transform their citizens
eye health in a matter of years not
generations but no country can do this
alone
our work would not be possible without
collaboration from our friends and
partners in Kenya India Botswana and
beyond that is why the Commonwealth is
so important we have a shared history
but more importantly we have a shared
future by working together we can make
that future better for millions of
citizens across the Commonwealth and the
globe at a time when there is such focus
on division vision can unite all of us
that's why inspired by the leadership
shown in Botswana and by the commitment
of many others leading eye health
organisations and banks are working
together to establish a 1 billion dollar
vision catalyst fund that will enable
all Commonwealth countries to move
towards universal eye health the
Commonwealth can be an example to the
world of what is possible and we unite
around a cause and when we do we will
hear more and more stories like that of
Mumma Philip the lady who'd been blind
for 20 years her surgery was a success
she looked 2 years younger
and was no longer displaying any signs
of dementia later that day we took her
home
we watched the shear wonder as she took
in her surroundings then the
anticipation to see the faces that had
become voices and when we arrived and
man stood at her door expectantly
after what seemed like an eternity
she was looking intensely across a scene
that looked so familiar yet different
and eventually asked Philip my son is
that you moments later they embraced and
the community celebrated we can be that
community more music from the Portsmouth
Gospel Choir now all students at
Portsmouth University with the great
bridge over troubled water simon and
garfunkel head of course
don't trouble the water
leave it alone why don't you I don't you
let it be still waters run deep yes they
do oh yeah
[Music]
Oh
[Applause]
[Music]
waterfront day
[Applause]
[Music]
from that brilliant performance to a
much more traditional hymn Lord of all
hopefulness
[Music]
prez now from 6:00 prayer leaders six
different faiths gracious God giver of
real hope and true peace draws all in
our wonderful diversity of culture
language and custom deeper into your
good purposes for the whole of your
creation help and strengtheners by your
Holy Spirit as we desire and commit
ourselves to protect and care for this
fragile planet and each other and as we
seek a common future in which mercy and
justice reign and our world resembles
more truly your kingdom of heaven
through Jesus Christ our Lord
Oh though kind Lord that has created old
humanity from the same stock thou has
decreed that all should belong to the
same household in thy holy presence they
are all thy servants and all mankind are
sheltered beneath thy Tabernacle all
have gathered together at the table of
bounty all are illumined through the
light of thy Providence thou hast
endowed all with talents and faculties
and all are submerged in the ocean of
thy mercy o thou kind Lord unite all let
the religions agree and make the nations
one so that they may see each other as
one family and the whole earth as one
home may they all live together in
perfect harmony
eternal God we pray for the coming of
the day when all your children will live
together in peace and friendship when
oppression discrimination and Prejudice
will be relics of the past may that day
come soon when all men and women will
know and understand that they are
brothers and sisters and be united in
humble reverence before you Anna mutual
love and respect he named a tall vimana
even shared a himegami Akkad how good it
is and how pleasant when sisters and
brothers live together in unity
there are many prophets and many
religions but God is one there are many
countries but the world is one there are
many races and ethnicities but humanity
is one there are men and women but
they're equal as both can think could
speak good do good we must all strive to
improve our world and overcome evil
today is better than yesterday
and tomorrow will be better than today
because of our cumulative good thoughts
good words and good deeds God creates as
we are all children of God of a
cumulative goodness constantly increases
the power of God evil only destroys it
cannot create therefore it is finite and
we will overcome it to an end one day in
the future
Oh Lord you are peace from you is peace
you are blessed or sustainer you are
Most High or one of majesty and nobility
you created us from one man and one
woman had it been your will he would
have made us all the same but you made
us into nations and tribes so that we
may know each other Oh magnificent
creator enable us to respect and
celebrate the diversity you have created
join together all our hearts as one free
us from fear hunger disease and war all
loving creator we ask you to answer our
prayer through your grace and your mercy
Almighty God we pray for those who face
challenges across the Commonwealth and
for a safe and prosperous future that
provides hope especially for its young
people in the face of those challenges
we pray for the courage to entrust
ourselves into your hands knowing that
this is our most secure place as we
gather to pray for the shared vision of
our diverse family we thank you for our
Commonwealth under the faithful
stewardship of Her Majesty the Queen may
she the royal family and all those who
share in this responsibility be guided
by you and be rewarded for their
steadfastness and commitment
[Music]
[Applause]
let us now stand to pledge ourselves
afresh to uphold and serve the values
and fellowship of the Commonwealth we
affirm that every person possesses
unique Worth and dignity we affirm our
respect for nature and that we will be
stewards of the earth by caring for
every part of it and for it as a whole
we affirm our belief in justice for
everyone and peace between peoples and
nations joining together in kinship and
affinity as members of one worldwide
Commonwealth family we acknowledge our
shared inheritances and celebrate the
goodwill and mutual respect which
inspire us to work with one another
towards a common future that is fairer
more secure more prosperous and more
sustainable for the good of all we
affirm our belief in the Commonwealth as
a force for good in the world and pledge
ourselves to service
[Music]
[Applause]
god grant to the living grace to the
departed rest to the church the Queen
the Commonwealth and all mankind
peace and Concord and to are sinners
life everlasting the blessing of God
Almighty the Father and the Son and the
Holy Spirit be among you and remain with
you always
[Music]
service is ending now another
Commonwealth day service a shortly the
Royal party will be moving slowly
towards the door and Robin was with me
here seemed to me to be you know a nice
day for the play a big day for the Queen
in her calendar I think she'll have
loved every minute of it actually Jeremy
this is an event that she herself
created used to be called an observance
so changed name to it to a celebration
and I think that that really did come
through in the music the atmosphere many
of the lifted it there was some real
contrast were there and a bit of fun as
well yeah there's always a bit of fun on
this about no but it is it's quite
unlike any other event that's held in
the in Westminster Abbey or indeed in
any other in any any Cathedral in
Britain it's it's why this this event is
is unique it you know I think part of
the fact is there are so many children
there more than 700 often when we cut to
one we saw someone smiling or maybe even
yawning
well you know that as they say they did
or children to get it in X but it's part
of the part of the fun of it and the
Queen very very specifically she likes
to have a very young congregation here
she doesn't want the full state occasion
diplomatic cord all the ideas now the
Queen has ever on this day has issued a
message and some of the important points
out of it I think include between saying
that shared inherit inheritances help us
overcome difference and the Commonwealth
history of course there's been quite a
bit of difference but we do have things
in common so diversity is a cause for
celebration rather than division and she
also speaks Robert about the excitement
and positive potential of friendly
rivalry and of course that's going to be
happening next month in Australia
absolutely April is an extraordinary
month we've got the Commonwealth Games
and a Commonwealth summit all back to
back that doesn't hamper Alpha
and Australia is going to be a fabulous
games the last games many viewers
remember were here in the United Kingdom
there in Glasgow in 2014 and magnificent
games by abiding memories of a dancing
tea cake at Celtic Park 2002 there were
those brilliant games in Manchester
which were really convinced the
International Olympic Committee that
Britain could put on an Olympics so the
Commonwealth Games are going to have a
huge following here and in Australia now
the Prince of Wales is going to be going
over with the Duchess of Cornwall to
Australia to open the games it's a bit
far for the Queen these days but what
about the talk there's been of Prince
Charles becoming head of the
Commonwealth when his time comes but the
headship of the Commonwealth is not
automatic it's not hereditary never has
been it's down to the heads of
government it was they who invited
effectively endorsed the Queen as head
of the Commonwealth and it'll be down to
them but frankly there is no one better
placed to to stand in for the Queen at
occasions like the opening of the
Commonwealth Games new one with the
exception of the Queen and the Duke of
Edinburgh who very sadly can't be here
today because as we know he's retired
from public duties but I'm sure he'll be
watching on television but apart from
the Queen and the Duke no one knows the
Commonwealth like the Prince of Wales
certainly all the leaders I've spoken to
all the Secretary General's they are all
with the opinion that he is the perfect
man - big smile on the Queen's face
she's looking very happy and now she's
meeting some of the people who actually
took part in the service like Andrew mr.
Ross is there who's that he's the from
peak vision and he's the man who is
trying to do everything he can to
eradicate and necessary and unnecessary
blindness
that's just Precor she performed her
poem the moment and the message of that
really was that small changes can bring
on big differences
that's Ingrid boo Kira
[Music]
a bastard Oh founder of one drum
and Esther Jessup the honorary president
of not Aaron Anna the Maori choir she
was singing - I saw her doing a lot
there and of course Liam Payne he
performed waiting on the world to change
[Music]
outside London beckons
a big month and a half of Commonwealth
activities coming up and the posi bearer
for the queen is Miss Angie de her
snatch is 11 years old as she issues
from the Westminster Bangladeshi
Association she hasn't had father come
down
[Music]
get the ladies there will have their
posies some boys as well giving them
[Music]
weenus had a broad grin on her face
throughout all of this the younger
generation of the world family as well
speaking to those people who took part
in the service it's going to be a
remarkable few weeks really not just for
the Commonwealth but for the royal
family as well obviously we've got the
the Commonwealth Games at the
Commonwealth Summit as we've discussed
and also put a royal baby in a royal
wedding I mean it really is it that
slightly reminds me that's Diamond
Jubilee summer of 2012 all these events
coming up on the horizon so this has
been a really special day for the Queen
to have all her family here at this
event that in many ways it's a
kick-starting what's going to be a
remarkable few row weeks the choir there
who has ever did a fabulous job and
behind them the flag bearers of all
those coin wealth countries and a lot of
chatting still going on inside the Abbey
Duchess of Cambridge talking to Liam
Payne there they attained yeah they're
having quite a wonder what they're
talking about
[Music]
outside that hour
[Applause]
now it's not the end of things for the
Duke and Duchess of Cambridge Prince
Harry and miss Marcal because they're
going to meet some schoolchildren next
now despite the rain
I think everyone's leaving here with a
touch of spring about them
this wasn't a solemn state occasion of
the kind that Westminster Abbey has
witnessed for centuries
it was a dignified celebration of an
association of very different states and
that is appropriate the Commonwealth
strength is its diversity some of that
will be on display in a couple of weeks
when the Commonwealth Games open in
Australia and after that Commonwealth
Heads of Government meet here in London
now those are probably the best-known
set-piece events but the Commonwealth
needs to be about more than sport and
summits if it's going to prosper it
needs to agree shared objectives and
then use the weight of more than
one-third of the world's population to
make this planet better and after all at
a time when the world is in an uncertain
place it's good to have friends
[Music]
[Applause]
it's an escape room what is basically a
room and you have to escape you do no no
I just understand words ask yourself
what would Holmes do Sherlock no Eamonn
not going out Thursday at 9:00 on BBC
one
[Music]
you